DOCS-3070: Add Hello world camera module (#3625)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/how-tos/hello-world-module.md

---
title: "Create a Hello World module"
linkTitle: "Hello World module"
type: "docs"
weight: 24
images: ["/registry/module-puzzle-piece.svg"]
icon: true
tags: ["modular resources", "components", "services", "registry"]
description: "Get started with custom module creation by creating a Hello World modular resource."
languages: ["python", "go"]
viamresources: ["components"]
platformarea: ["registry"]
level: "Beginner"
date: "2024-10-22"
# updated: ""  # When the tutorial was last entirely checked
cost: "0"
---

This guide will walk you through creating a simple {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="modular-resource" text="modular resource" >}} that responds to API calls by returning a random number, and a configured image.
The goal is to familiarize you with how to create your own {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="module" text="modules" >}} and [modular resources](/registry/modular-resources/).

{{% alert title="In this page" color="tip" %}}

1. [Concepts](#what-is-a-module-what-is-a-modular-resource)

> 1. [Write the basic functionality into a test script](#write-the-basic-functionality-into-a-test-script)

Author: ```suggestion
1. [Create a test script](#create-a-test-script)
```

1. [Choose an API](#choose-an-api-to-implement)
1. [Generate code stub files](#generate-stub-files)
1. [Implement the API](#implement-the-api)
1. [Test your module](#test-your-module)
1. [Package the module](#package-the-module)

{{% /alert %}}

## Prerequisites

{{< expand "Install the Viam CLI and authenticate" >}}
Install the Viam CLI and authenticate to Viam, from the same machine that you intend to upload your module from.

{{< readfile "/static/include/how-to/install-cli.md" >}}

Authenticate your CLI session with Viam using one of the following options:

{{< readfile "/static/include/how-to/auth-cli.md" >}}
{{< /expand >}}

{{% expand "viam-server installed on your computer and connected to the Viam app." %}}

{{% snippet "setup.md" %}}

{{% /expand%}}

## What is a module? What is a modular resource?

> A module is a set of files that provides support for one or more {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="component" text="components" >}} or {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="service" text="services" >}} that are not built into `viam-server`.

Author: Technically a local module that is not packaged or deployed is still a module. But maybe that's something we don't care about here and should gloss over.
```suggestion
A module is a package you can deploy to your machines to add support for one or more {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="component" text="components" >}} or {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="service" text="services" >}}.
```

> A module is a set of files that provides support for one or more {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="component" text="components" >}} or {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="service" text="services" >}} that are not built into `viam-server`.

Author: I'm getting rid of this section anyway so that makes this easy :D

> The {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="resource" text="resources" >}} supported by a module are called modular resources.

Author: I think "come from" is too vague
```suggestion
The resources supported by a module are called modular resources.
```

> ## Write the basic functionality into a test script

Reviewer: Shorten (also you use a lot of "simple" and "basic") - I left the simple above but I think the basic is unnecessary. 
```suggestion
## Create a test script
```

> The point of creating a module is to add functionality to your machine, so before you do anything else, it is helpful to define the functionality that you will later package into a module.
> 
> For the purposes of this guide, you're going to make a module that does two things: It opens an image file from a configured path on your machine, and it prints `Hello, World! The latest random number is __.` with a random number in the blank.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating a module, start by definining the functionality you want to add.

For the purposes of this guide, you're going to make a module that does two things: It opens an image file from a configured path on your machine, and it prints `Hello, World! The latest random number is __.` with a random number in the blank.
```

Author: Hmm. This is less verbose but I want to find a way to emphasize the context of why we're even creating a module, and also the difference between the test script and implementing the API.

1. Find an image you'd like to display when your program runs.

>    We used [this image of a computer with "hello world" on the screen](https://unsplash.com/photos/a-laptop-computer-sitting-on-top-of-a-wooden-desk-8q6e5hu3Ilc).

Reviewer: very nice touch I love this.

print("Hello, World! The latest random number is ", number, ".")
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Go" %}}

```go {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
// test.go opens an image and prints a random number
package main

import "fmt"
import "math/rand"

func main() {

  number := rand.Float64()
  fmt.Println("Hello, World! The latest random number is ", number, ".")

  // TODO
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

1. Replace the path in the script above with the path to where you saved your photo.
   Save the file.

1. Run the test script in your terminal:

    {{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

It's best practice to use a virtual environment for running Python scripts.
You'll also need to install the dependency Pillow in the virtual environment before running the test script.

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
source venv/bin/activate
pip install Pillow
python3 test.py
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Go" %}}

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
go run test.go
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

    The image you saved should open on your screen, and a random number should print to your terminal.

> ## Choose an API to implement

Reviewer: I love, love, love that this implements 2 apis. I just yesterday heard feedback about how we keep showing people the pattern one module with one resource and that no one will think to do it differently. I think this breaks that pattern.

> Now it's time to decide which standard Viam [API](/appendix/apis/) makes the most sense for your module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now it's time to decide which Viam [APIs](/appendix/apis/#component-apis) make the most sense for your module.
```

You need a way to return an image, and you need a way to return a number.

If you look at the [camera API](/appendix/apis/components/camera/), you can see the `GetImage` method, which returns an image.

> This seems promising.

Reviewer: don't know if this feels too infantilizing?
```suggestion
That will work for the image.
```

Author: Definitely informal--was being experimental haha. Will change.

None of the camera API methods return a number though.

Look at the [sensor API](/appendix/apis/components/sensor/), which includes the `GetReadings` method.

> You could return a number with that, but the sensor API can't return an image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can return a number with that, but the sensor API can't return an image.
```

> Your module can support multiple modular resources, so for our purposes here, let's make two modular resources: a camera to return the image, and a sensor to return a random number.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your module can support multiple modular resources, so let's make two modular resources: a camera to return the image, and a sensor to return a random number.
```

## Generate stub files

The easiest way to generate the necessary files for your module is to use the [Viam CLI](/cli/).

1. Run the `module generate` command in your terminal:

    ```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
    viam module generate
    ```

1. Follow the prompts, selecting the following options:

   - Module name: `hello-world`
   - Language: Your choice
   - Visibility: `Private`
   - Namespace/Organization ID:
     - In the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), navigate to your organization settings through the menu in upper right corner of the page.
       Find the **Public namespace** and copy that string.
   - Resource to add to the module (API): `Camera Component`.
   We will add the sensor later.
   - Model name: `hello-camera`
   - Enable cloud build: `No`
   - Register module: `No`

1. Hit your Enter key and the generator will generate a folder called <file>hello-world</file> containing stub files for your modular camera.

> ## Implement the API

Author: ```suggestion
## Implement the API methods
```

Edit the stub files to implement your test script in a way that works with the camera API:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

> 1. Open the <file>hello-world/src/main.py</file> file in your code editing program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open the <file>hello-world/src/main.py</file> file in your code editor.
```

1. Add the following to the list of imports at the top of <file>main.py</file>:

    ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
    from viam.media.utils.pil import pil_to_viam_image
    from viam.media.video import CameraMimeType
    from viam.utils import struct_to_dict
    from PIL import Image
    ```

> 1. Instead of hard-coding the path to the image into the module itself, make the path a configurable attribute so you or other users of the module can easily set a different path.
>    Add the following lines to the `reconfigure()` function definition:

Reviewer: Just shortening sentences a bit
```suggestion
1. In the test script you hard-coded the path to the image. For the module, let's make the path a configurable attribute so you or other users of the module can set a different path.
   Add the following lines to the `reconfigure()` function definition:
```

Reviewer: really great idea with the configurable attribute btw

    ```python {class="line-numbers"}
    attrs = struct_to_dict(config.attributes)
    self.image_path = str(attrs.get("image_path"))
    ```

> 1. Since the camera won't work unless the user configures an `image_path` attribute, add the following code to the `validate()` function to throw an error if `image_path` isn't configured:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Since the camera must know which file to show, `image_path` is a required attribute. That means someone using the module has to configure an `image_path`. Add the following code to the `validate()` function to throw an error if `image_path` isn't configured:
```

Author: Am I allowed to anthropomorphize the camera like that?
```suggestion
1. Since the camera needs to get an image from somewhere, `image_path` is a required attribute.
   That means someone using the module must configure an `image_path`.
   Add the following code to the `validate()` function to throw an error if `image_path` isn't configured:
```

    ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
    # Check that a path to get an image was configured
    fields = config.attributes.fields
    if not "image_path" in fields:
        raise Exception("Missing image_path attribute.")
    elif not fields["image_path"].HasField("string_value"):
        raise Exception("image_path must be a string.")
    ```

1. The module generator created a stub for the `get_image()` function we want to implement:

   ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers" data-start="79" }
    async def get_image(
        self,
        mime_type: str = "",
        *,
        extra: Optional[Dict[str, Any]] = None,
        timeout: Optional[float] = None,
        **kwargs
    ) -> ViamImage:
        raise NotImplementedError()
   ```

   You need to replace `raise NotImplementedError()` with code to actually implement the method:

>    ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers" data-start="86" }

Reviewer: nice

   ) -> ViamImage:
       img = Image.open(self.image_path)
       return pil_to_viam_image(img, CameraMimeType.JPEG)
   ```

    You can leave the rest of the functions not implemented, because this module is not meant to return a point cloud (`get_point_cloud()`), and does not need to return multiple images simultaneously (`get_images()`).

1. Open <file>requirements.txt</file>.
   Add the following line:

   ```text
   Pillow
   ```

1. Create a virtual Python environment with necessary packages by running the setup file:

> ```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
> sh setup.sh
> ```

Reviewer: This looks like it worked for the other oens
```suggestion
   ```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   sh setup.sh
   ```
```

Author: Oop yep

1. In the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), navigate to your machine's **CONFIGURE** page.

1. Click the **+** button, select **Local module**, then again select **Local module**.

1. Enter the path to the automatically-generated <file>run.sh</file> file, for example, `/Users/jessamyt/myCode/hello-world/run.sh`.
   Click **Create**.

1. Now add the modular resource provided by the module:

   Click **+**, click **Local module**, then click **Local component**.

   For the {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="model-namespace-triplet" text="model namespace triplet" >}}, enter `<namespace>:hello-world:hello-camera`, replacing `<namespace>` with the organization namespace you used when generating the stub files.
   For example, `jessamy:hello-world:hello-camera`.

   For type, enter `camera`.

   For name, you can use the automatic `camera-1`.

1. Configure the image path attribute by pasting the following in place of the `{}` brackets:

   ```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
   {
    "image_path": "<replace with the path to your image>"
   }
   ```

   Replace the path with the path to your image, for example `"/Users/jessamyt/Downloads/hello-world.jpg"`.

> 1. Save the config, then click to open the **TEST** section of the camera's configuration card.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Save the config, then click the **TEST** section of the camera's configuration card.
```

---
title: "Create a Hello World module"
linkTitle: "Hello World module"
type: "docs"
weight: 24
images: ["/registry/module-puzzle-piece.svg"]
icon: true
tags: ["modular resources", "components", "services", "registry"]
description: "Get started writing your own modular resources by creating a Hello World module."
languages: ["python", "go"]
viamresources: ["components"]
platformarea: ["registry"]
level: "Beginner"
date: "2024-10-22"
# updated: ""  # When the tutorial was last entirely checked
cost: "0"
---

This guide will walk you through creating two simple {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="modular-resource" text="modular resources" >}} that respond to API calls by returning a configured image, and a random number.

> By the end of this guide, you will be able to create your own {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="module" text="modules" >}} and [modular resources](/registry/modular-resources/).

Author: ```suggestion
By the end of this guide, you will be able to create your own [modular resources](/registry/modular-resources/) and package them into {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="module" text="modules" >}} so you can use them on your machines.
```

> By the end of this guide, you will be able to create your own {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="module" text="modules" >}} and [modular resources](/registry/modular-resources/).

Reviewer: I do want the link to go. I think in this case we've just added the same amount of information people would get from that page for this task. If they're here they don't need to look at configuration info or other available modular resources.

{{% alert title="In this page" color="tip" %}}

1. [Concepts](#what-is-a-module-what-is-a-modular-resource)
1. [Create a test script](#create-a-test-script)
1. [Choose an API](#choose-an-api-to-implement)
1. [Generate code stub files](#generate-stub-files)
1. [Implement the API methods](#implement-the-api-methods)
1. [Test your module](#test-your-module)
1. [Package and upload the module](#package-and-upload-the-module)

{{% /alert %}}

## Prerequisites

{{< expand "Install the Viam CLI and authenticate" >}}
Install the Viam CLI and authenticate to Viam, from the same machine that you intend to upload your module from.

{{< readfile "/static/include/how-to/install-cli.md" >}}

Authenticate your CLI session with Viam using one of the following options:

{{< readfile "/static/include/how-to/auth-cli.md" >}}
{{< /expand >}}

{{% expand "Install viam-server on your computer and connect to the Viam app" %}}

{{% snippet "setup.md" %}}

{{% /expand%}}

> ## What is a module? What is a modular resource?

Author: Gone. 

I think the intro is probably good on it's own esp. with the tooltips and links there.

   We used [this image of a computer with "hello world" on the screen](https://unsplash.com/photos/a-laptop-computer-sitting-on-top-of-a-wooden-desk-8q6e5hu3Ilc).
   Save the image to your computer.

1. Create a test script file on your computer and copy the following code into it:

    {{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
# test.py opens an image and prints a random number
from PIL import Image
import random

# TODO: Replace path with path to where you saved your photo
photo = Image.open("/Users/jessamyt/Downloads/hello-world.jpg")

photo.show()

number = random.random()

print("Hello, World! The latest random number is ", number, ".")
```

{{% /tab %}}
<!-- TODO add back in when generator supports Go

```go {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
// test.go opens an image and prints a random number
package main

import "fmt"
import "math/rand"

func main() {

  number := rand.Float64()
  fmt.Println("Hello, World! The latest random number is ", number, ".")

  // TODO
}
```

-->
{{< /tabs >}}

1. Replace the path in the script above with the path to where you saved your photo.

>    Save the file.

Author: ah good point

1. Run the test script in your terminal:

    {{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

It's best practice to use a virtual environment for running Python scripts.
You'll also need to install the dependency Pillow in the virtual environment before running the test script.

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install Pillow
python3 test.py
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

    The image you saved should open on your screen, and a random number should print to your terminal.

## Choose an API to implement

Now it's time to decide which Viam [APIs](/appendix/apis/#component-apis) make the most sense for your module.
You need a way to return an image, and you need a way to return a number.

If you look at the [camera API](/appendix/apis/components/camera/), you can see the `GetImage` method, which returns an image.
That will work for the image.
None of the camera API methods return a number though.

Look at the [sensor API](/appendix/apis/components/sensor/), which includes the `GetReadings` method.
You can return a number with that, but the sensor API can't return an image.

> Your module can support multiple modular resources, so let's make two modular resources: a camera to return the image, and a sensor to return a random number.

Author: You're right I was using support incorrectly. I think provide, as you used earlier, is better though.
```suggestion
Your module can provide multiple modular resources, so let's make two modular resources: a camera to return the image, and a sensor to return a random number.
```

{{% alert title="Note" color="note" %}}

For a quicker hello world experience, you can skip the sensor and only create a camera modular resource.
If you prefer the simpler path, skip the sensor sections in the steps below.

> {{% /alert %}}

Author: If I remove the expanders I don't think that'll be the case

### Generate the camera files

The CLI module generator generates all the necessary files for one modular resource at a time.
First let's generate the camera component files, and we'll add the sensor code later.

1. Run the `module generate` command in your terminal:

    ```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
    viam module generate
    ```

1. Follow the prompts, selecting the following options:

   - Module name: `hello-world`
   - Language: Your choice
   - Visibility: `Private`
   - Namespace/Organization ID:
     - In the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), navigate to your organization settings through the menu in upper right corner of the page.
       Find the **Public namespace** and copy that string.
       In the example snippets below, the namespace is `jessamy`.
   - Resource to add to the module (API): `Camera Component`.
   We will add the sensor later.
   - Model name: `hello-camera`
   - Enable cloud build: `No`
   - Register module: `No`

1. Hit your Enter key and the generator will generate a folder called <file>hello-world</file> containing stub files for your modular camera component.

### Generate the sensor code

> {{< expand "Click if you are also creating a sensor component" >}}

Author: The copy pasting is a bit awkward and I don't love it--it makes the whole thing twice as long, and makes it look like creating a basic module is much more complex than it actually is. I do actually mean to position it as "you'll create a camera resource and if you want to you can also create a sensor," but I didn't fully commit in the intro since I'd already written it one way and wasn't sure what you'd think of the optionality.

I think I should just change the intro and keep this guide shorter the way it is. Thoughts?

> {{< expand "Click if you are also creating a sensor component" >}}

Author: *the way that it is in terms of optionality, whether or not the sensor code all gets more simply copied per your other comment.

Some of the code you just generated is shared across the module no matter how many modular resource models it supports.
Some of the code you generated is camera-specific.
You need to add some sensor-specific code to support the sensor component.

1. Instead of writing the code manually, use the module generator again.

    ```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
    viam module generate
    ```

1. You're going to delete this module after copy-pasting the sensor-specific code from it.
   The only things that matter are the API and the model name.

   - Module name: `temporary`
   - Language: Your choice
   - Visibility: `Private`
   - Namespace/Organization ID: Same as you used before.
   - Resource to add to the module (API): `Sensor Component`.
   - Model name: `hello-sensor`
   - Enable cloud build: `No`

>    - Register module: `No`

Author: Hmm so the reason I used the generator is to make it more generalizable to different component/service subtypes. If I just hand them the code, they might not realize how they could do it themselves.

>    - Register module: `No`

Author: Sorry did not mean to outdate with linter. Still paying attention to this thread.

>    - Register module: `No`

Reviewer: ok - since it'll change anyway, it doesn't really matter anyway I suppose

      "models": [
        {
          "api": "rdk:component:camera",
          "model": "jessamy:hello-world:hello-camera"
        },
        {
          "api": "rdk:component:sensor",
          "model": "jessamy:hello-world:hello-sensor"
        }
      ],
      "entrypoint": "./run.sh",
      "first_run": ""
    }
    ```

1. You can now delete the <file>temporary</file> module directory and all its contents.

{{< /expand >}}

## Implement the API methods

Edit the stub files to implement your test script in a way that works with the camera and sensor APIs:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

### Implement the camera API

First, implement the camera API methods by editing the camera class definition:

1. Open the <file>hello-world/src/main.py</file> file again in your code editor.

1. Add the following to the list of imports at the top of <file>main.py</file>:

    ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
    from viam.media.utils.pil import pil_to_viam_image
    from viam.media.video import CameraMimeType
    from viam.utils import struct_to_dict
    from PIL import Image
    ```

1. In the test script you hard-coded the path to the image.

>    For the module, let's make the path a configurable attribute so you or other users of the module can set a different path.

Author: ```suggestion
   For the module, let's make the path a configurable attribute so you or other users of the module can set the path from which to get the image.
```

>    Add the following lines to the camera's `reconfigure()` function definition:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Add the following lines to the camera's `reconfigure()` function definition.
   These lines set the `image_path` based on the configuration when the resource is configured or reconfigured.
```

    ```python {class="line-numbers" data-start="68"}
    attrs = struct_to_dict(config.attributes)
    self.image_path = str(attrs.get("image_path"))
    ```

> 1. Since the camera needs to get an image from somewhere, `image_path` is a required attribute.

Reviewer: One doesn't really logically follow from the other. The camera could get the image from a default path or w/e. It's a choice to do it like this.
```suggestion
1. We are not providing a default image but rely on the end user to supply a valid path to an image when configuring the resource.
   This means `image_path` is a required attribute.
```

>    That means someone using the module must configure an `image_path`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    fields = config.attributes.fields
    if not "image_path" in fields:
        raise Exception("Missing image_path attribute.")
    elif not fields["image_path"].HasField("string_value"):
        raise Exception("image_path must be a string.")
    ```

1. The module generator created a stub for the `get_image()` function we want to implement:

   ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers" data-start="79" }
    async def get_image(
        self,
        mime_type: str = "",
        *,
        extra: Optional[Dict[str, Any]] = None,
        timeout: Optional[float] = None,
        **kwargs
    ) -> ViamImage:
        raise NotImplementedError()
   ```

   You need to replace `raise NotImplementedError()` with code to actually implement the method:

   ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers" data-start="86" }
   ) -> ViamImage:
       img = Image.open(self.image_path)
       return pil_to_viam_image(img, CameraMimeType.JPEG)
   ```

    You can leave the rest of the functions not implemented, because this module is not meant to return a point cloud (`get_point_cloud()`), and does not need to return multiple images simultaneously (`get_images()`).

>     Save the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

    Save the file.
```

1. Open <file>requirements.txt</file>.
   Add the following line:

   ```text
   Pillow
   ```

### Implement the sensor API

> {{< expand "Click if you are also creating a sensor component" >}}

Reviewer: see above - please don't put into expander

Author: Still figuring out best approach. Since https://github.com/viamrobotics/docs/pull/3625#discussion_r1823131978 got outdated with linter, linking here for visibility.

You don't need to edit any of the validate or configuration methods because you're not adding any configurable attributes for the sensor model.

1. Add `random` to the list of imports in <file>main.py</file> for the random number generation:

   ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
   import random
   ```

1. The sensor API only has one resource-specific method, `get_readings()`:

   ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers" data-start="156" }
    async def get_readings(
        self,
        *,
        extra: Optional[Mapping[str, Any]] = None,
        timeout: Optional[float] = None,
        **kwargs
    ) -> Mapping[str, SensorReading]:
        raise NotImplementedError()
   ```

   Replace `raise NotImplementedError()` with the following code:

   ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers" data-start="162" }
    ) -> Mapping[str, SensorReading]:
        number = random.random()
        return {
            "random_number": number
        }
   ```

   Save the file.

{{< /expand >}}

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Test your module

With the implementation written, it's time to test your module locally:

> 1. Create a virtual Python environment with necessary packages by running the setup file from within the <file>hello-world</file> directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a virtual Python environment with the necessary packages by running the setup file from within the <file>hello-world</file> directory:
```

   ```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   sh setup.sh
   ```

    This environment is where the local module will run.
    `viam-server` does not need to run inside this environment.

1. Make sure your machine's instance of `viam-server` is live and connected to the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com).

>    If the image your camera will return is stored outside of the Python virtual environment, make sure you are not accidentally running `viam-server` from inside the venv or the camera won't be able to find it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If the image your camera will return is stored outside of the Python virtual environment, make sure you are not accidentally running `viam-server` from inside the virtual environment or the camera won't be able to find it.
```

   Click **Create**.

1. Now add the modular camera resource provided by the module:

   Click **+**, click **Local module**, then click **Local component**.

   For the {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="model-namespace-triplet" text="model namespace triplet" >}}, enter `<namespace>:hello-world:hello-camera`, replacing `<namespace>` with the organization namespace you used when generating the stub files.
   For example, `jessamy:hello-world:hello-camera`.

   For type, enter `camera`.

   For name, you can use the automatic `camera-1`.

1. Configure the image path attribute by pasting the following in place of the `{}` brackets:

   ```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
   {
    "image_path": "<replace with the path to your image>"
   }
   ```

   Replace the path with the path to your image, for example `"/Users/jessamyt/Downloads/hello-world.jpg"`.

1. Save the config, then click the **TEST** section of the camera's configuration card.

   ![The Viam app configuration interface with the Test section of the camera card open, showing a hello world image.](/how-tos/hello-camera.png)

   You should see your image displayed.
   If not, check the **LOGS** tab for errors.

> {{< expand "Click if you also created a sensor component" >}}

Reviewer: see above

9. Add the modular sensor:

   Click **+**, click **Local module**, then click **Local component**.

   For the {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="model-namespace-triplet" text="model namespace triplet" >}}, enter `<namespace>:hello-world:hello-sensor`, replacing `<namespace>` with the organization namespace you used when generating the stub files.
   For example, `jessamy:hello-world:hello-sensor`.

   For type, enter `sensor`.

   For name, you can use the automatic `sensor-1`.

10. Save the config, then click **TEST** to see a random number generated every second.

    ![The sensor card test section open.](/how-tos/hello-sensor.png)

{{< /expand >}}

## Package and upload the module

> You have a working local module.
> You can make it available to deploy on more machines by packaging it and uploading it to the [Viam registry](https://app.viam.com/registry).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You now have a working local module.
To make it available to deploy on more machines, you can package it and upload it to the [Viam registry](https://app.viam.com/registry).
```

The hello world module you created is for learning purposes, not to provide any meaningful utility, so we recommend making it available only to machines within your {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="organization" text="organization" >}} instead of making it publicly available.

{{< expand "Click to see what you would do differently if this wasn't just a hello world module" >}}

1. Create a GitHub repo with all the source code for your module.
   Add the link to that repo as the `url` in the <file>meta.json</file> file.

> 1. Create a README to document what your module does and how to configure it.

Reviewer: This is interesting. The generate command was supposed to also generate a readme. Please investigate whether this is an oversight

Author: Asking. The scope doesn't mention a readme though.

> 1. If you wanted to share the module outside of your organization, you'd set `"visibility": "public"` in the <file>meta.json</file> file.

Reviewer: You used to have to run `viam module update` as well, it's possible we no longer have to but please double check.

Author: yes, you would if you did these steps *after* the following steps. But these are before the package and upload steps so you would just upload the thing once.

Reviewer: you tested this, right?

{{< /expand >}}

To package and upload your module and make it available to configure on machines in your organization:

1. Package the module as an archive, run the following command from inside the <file>hello-world</file> directory:

    ```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
    tar -czf module.tar.gz run.sh setup.sh requirements.txt src
    ```

    This creates a tarball called <file>module.tar.gz</file>.

> 1. Run the `viam module upload` CLI command to upload the module to the Viam registry:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Run the `viam module upload` CLI command to upload the module to the registry:
```
it's either the registry or the Viam Registry. If you're refering to it as the product

    ```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
    viam module upload --version 1.0.0 --platform any module.tar.gz
    ```

1. Now, if you look at the [Viam Registry page](https://app.viam.com/registry) while logged into your account, you'll be able to find your private module listed.
   You can configure the hello-sensor and hello-camera on your machines just as you would configure other components and services; there's no more need for local module configuration.

    ![The create a component menu open, searching for hello. The hello-camera and hello-sensor components are shown in the search results.](/how-tos/hello-config.png)

For more information about uploading modules, see [Upload a module](/how-tos/upload-module/).

## Next steps

> For an example module that gets weather data from an online source, see the example code in [Create a sensor module with Python](/how-tos/sensor-module/).

Reviewer: Bec
```suggestion
For an example module that creates different kinds of sensor models, for example to get weather data from an online source, see the example code in [Create a sensor module with Python](/how-tos/sensor-module/).
```

Author: I don't think it's a categorically different kind of sensor model?

Reviewer: - The guide shows multiple models rather than just one, so this feels weird.
- My suggestion added the word example three times and made the sentence very long, I think this is better

```suggestion
For a guide that walks you through creating different sensor models, for example to get weather data from an online source, see [Create a sensor module with Python](/how-tos/sensor-module/).
```

> For more module creation information with more programming language options, see the general [Create a module](/how-tos/create-module/) guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more module creation information with more programming language options, see the [Create a module](/how-tos/create-module/) guide.
```

---
title: "Create a Hello World module"
linkTitle: "Hello World module"
type: "docs"
weight: 24
images: ["/registry/module-puzzle-piece.svg"]
icon: true
tags: ["modular resources", "components", "services", "registry"]
description: "Get started writing your own modular resources by creating a Hello World module."
languages: ["python", "go"]
viamresources: ["components"]
platformarea: ["registry"]
level: "Beginner"
date: "2024-10-22"
# updated: ""  # When the tutorial was last entirely checked
cost: "0"
---

> This guide will walk you through creating two simple {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="modular-resource" text="modular resources" >}} that respond to API calls by returning a configured image, and a random number.

Author: ```suggestion
This guide will walk you through creating a {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="modular-resource" text="modular camera resource" >}} that responds to API calls by returning a configured image.
This guide also includes optional steps to create a modular sensor that returns random numbers.
```

> By the end of this guide, you will be able to create your own modular resources and package them into {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="module" text="modules" >}} so you can use them on your machines.

Author: ```suggestion
By the end of this guide, you will be able to create your own modular resources and package them into modules so you can use them on your machines.
```

> By the end of this guide, you will be able to create your own [modular resources](/registry/modular-resources/) and package them into {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="module" text="modules" >}} so you can use them on your machines.

Reviewer: I do want the link to go. I think in this case we've just added the same amount of information people would get from that page for this task. If they're here they don't need to look at configuration info or other available modular resources.

```suggestion
By the end of this guide, you will be able to create your own modular resources and package them into {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="module" text="modules" >}} so you can use them on your machines.
```

```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install Pillow
python3 test.py
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

    The image you saved should open on your screen, and a random number should print to your terminal.

1.  In later steps, the module generator will create a new virtual environment with required dependencies, so you can deactivate the one you just ran the test script in:

    ```sh {id="terminal-prompt" class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
    deactivate
    ```

## Choose an API to implement

Now it's time to decide which Viam [APIs](/appendix/apis/#component-apis) make sense for your module.
You need a way to return an image, and you need a way to return a number.

If you look at the [camera API](/appendix/apis/components/camera/), you can see the `GetImage` method, which returns an image.
That will work for the image.
None of the camera API methods return a number though.

Look at the [sensor API](/appendix/apis/components/sensor/), which includes the `GetReadings` method.
You can return a number with that, but the sensor API can't return an image.

> Your module can provide multiple modular resources, so let's make two modular resources: a camera to return the image, and a sensor to return a random number.

Reviewer: In this case we're talking about the module more just as the container for modular resources. It provides those resources once the module is deployed. So if we're talking about it in the context of how it'll be used I think provide is fine, in the context of "we can create two modular resources", I think it's definitely "contain". 

If you look at the UI, that also uses "contained"
<img width="317" alt="Screenshot 2024-10-31 at 13 03 19" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/77dd0c10-af0c-4cdb-8601-57f9ce525773">

```suggestion
Your module can contain multiple modular resources, so let's make two modular resources: a camera to return the image, and a sensor to return a random number.
```

1. Save the config, then click the **TEST** section of the camera's configuration card.

   ![The Viam app configuration interface with the Test section of the camera card open, showing a hello world image.](/how-tos/hello-camera.png)

   You should see your image displayed.
   If not, check the **LOGS** tab for errors.

{{< expand "Click if you also created a sensor component" >}}

9. Add the modular sensor:

   Click **+**, click **Local module**, then click **Local component**.

   For the {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="model-namespace-triplet" text="model namespace triplet" >}}, enter `<namespace>:hello-world:hello-sensor`, replacing `<namespace>` with the organization namespace you used when generating the stub files.
   For example, `jessamy:hello-world:hello-sensor`.

   For type, enter `sensor`.

   For name, you can use the automatic `sensor-1`.

10. Save the config, then click **TEST** to see a random number generated every second.

    ![The sensor card test section open.](/how-tos/hello-sensor.png)

{{< /expand >}}

## Package and upload the module

You now have a working local module.

> To make it available to deploy on more machines, you can package it and upload it to the [Viam registry](https://app.viam.com/registry).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make it available to deploy on more machines, you can package it and upload it to the [Viam Registry](https://app.viam.com/registry).
```
